README.md, before:

# Linux Kernel Module Cheat

Run one command, get into QEMU Buildroot BusyBox with several minimal Linux kernel 4.9 module example tutorials. Tested in Ubuntu 14.04 - 16.10 hosts.

Usage:

    sudo apt-get install qemu
    ./run

First build will take a while (GCC, Linux kernel).

QEMU opens up, and you can run:

    root
    insmod /hello.ko
    insmod /hello2.ko
    rmmod hello
    rmmod hello2

This should print to the screen:

    hello init
    hello2 init
    hello cleanup
    hello2 cleanup

which are `printk` messages from `init` and `cleanup` methods of those modules.

Each module comes from a C file under `kernel_module/`. For module usage do:

    head *. use Buildroot's default kernel version, you can confirm it after build with:

    grep BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_VERSION buildroot/.config

After the first build, you can also run just:

    ./runqemu

to save a few seconds. `./run` wouldn't rebuild everything, but checking timestamps takes a few moments.

We use `printk` a lot, and it shows on the QEMU terminal by default. If that annoys you (e.g. you want to see stdout separately), do:

    dmesg -n 1

See also: <https://superuser.com/questions/351387/how-to-stop-kernel-messages-from-flooding-my-console>

## Debugging

To GDB the Linux kernel, first run:

    ./runqemu -d

If you want to break immediately at a symbol, e.g. `start_kernel` of the boot sequence, open another terminal and run:

    ./rungdb start_kernel

Now QEMU will stop there, and you can use the normal GDB commands:

    l
    n
    c

To skip the boot, run just:

    ./rungdb

and when you want to break, do `Ctrl + C` from GDB.

To have some fun, you can first run inside QEMU:

    /count.sh

which counts to infinity to stdout, and then:

    Ctrl + C
    break sys_write

And now you can control the counting from GDB:

    continue
    continue
    continue

See also: <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/11408041/how-to-debug-the-linux-kernel-with-gdb-and-qemu>

## Text mode

Show serial output of QEMU directly on the current terminal, without opening a QEMU window:

    ./run -n

To exit, just do a regular:

    poweroff

This is particularly useful to get full panic traces when you start making the kernel crashing :-)

In case of a panic, you want your terminal back with `Ctrl + C, A` and type `quit`. See also: <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/14165158/how-to-switch-to-qemu-monitor-console-when-running-with-curses>

See also: <https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/208260/how-to-scroll-up-after-a-kernel-panic>

## Table of contents

1.  [Introduction](introduction.md)
1.  [Build](build.md)
1.  [kmod](kmod.md)
1.  [Bibliography](bibliography.md)
1.  Examples
    1.  [Host](host/)
    1.  Buildroot
        1.  Debugging
            1.  [hello](kernel_module/hello.c)
            1.  [hello2](kernel_module/hello2.c)
            1.  [debugfs](kernel_module/debugfs.c)
            1.  [panic](kernel_module/panic.c)
        1.  [fops](kernel_module/fops.c)
        1.  Asynchronous
            1. [workqueue](kernel_module/workqueue.c)
            1. [sleep](kernel_module/sleep.c)
            1. [kthread](kernel_module/kthread.c)
            1. [timer](kernel_module/timer.c)
            1. [work_from_work](kernel_module/work_from_work.c)

Commit message:

qemu on background for debug

README.md, after:

# Linux Kernel Module Cheat

Run one command, get into QEMU Buildroot BusyBox with several minimal Linux kernel 4.9 module example tutorials. Tested in Ubuntu 14.04 - 16.10 hosts.

Usage:

    sudo apt-get install qemu
    ./run

First build will take a while (GCC, Linux kernel).

QEMU opens up, and you can run:

    root
    insmod /hello.ko
    insmod /hello2.ko
    rmmod hello
    rmmod hello2

This should print to the screen:

    hello init
    hello2 init
    hello cleanup
    hello2 cleanup

which are `printk` messages from `init` and `cleanup` methods of those modules.

Each module comes from a C file under `kernel_module/`. For module usage do:

    head *. use Buildroot's default kernel version, you can confirm it after build with:

    grep BR2_LINUX_KERNEL_VERSION buildroot/.config

After the first build, you can also run just:

    ./runqemu

to save a few seconds. `./run` wouldn't rebuild everything, but checking timestamps takes a few moments.

We use `printk` a lot, and it shows on the QEMU terminal by default. If that annoys you (e.g. you want to see stdout separately), do:

    dmesg -n 1

See also: <https://superuser.com/questions/351387/how-to-stop-kernel-messages-from-flooding-my-console>

## Text mode

Show serial output of QEMU directly on the current terminal, without opening a QEMU window:

    ./run -n

To exit, just do a regular:

    poweroff

This is particularly useful to get full panic traces when you start making the kernel crashing :-)

In case of a panic, you want your terminal back with `Ctrl + C, A` and type `quit`. See also: <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/14165158/how-to-switch-to-qemu-monitor-console-when-running-with-curses>

See also: <https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/208260/how-to-scroll-up-after-a-kernel-panic>

## Debugging

To GDB the Linux kernel, first run:

    ./runqemu -d

This starts QEMU on the background of the shell, to prepare for running GDB.

If you want to break immediately at a symbol, e.g. `start_kernel` of the boot sequence, run:

    ./rungdb start_kernel

Now QEMU will stop there, and you can use the normal GDB commands:

    l
    n
    c

To skip the boot, run just:

    ./rungdb

and when you want to break, do `Ctrl + C` from GDB.

To have some fun, you can first run inside QEMU:

    /count.sh

which counts to infinity to stdout, and then:

    Ctrl + C
    break sys_write

And now you can control the counting from GDB:

    continue
    continue
    continue

See also: <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/11408041/how-to-debug-the-linux-kernel-with-gdb-and-qemu>

If you are using text mode:

    ./runqemu -d -n

QEMU cannot be put on the background of the current shell, so you will need to open a separate terminal and run:

    ./rungdb

manually.

## Table of contents

1.  [Introduction](introduction.md)
1.  [Build](build.md)
1.  [kmod](kmod.md)
1.  [Bibliography](bibliography.md)
1.  Examples
    1.  [Host](host/)
    1.  Buildroot
        1.  Debugging
            1.  [hello](kernel_module/hello.c)
            1.  [hello2](kernel_module/hello2.c)
            1.  [debugfs](kernel_module/debugfs.c)
            1.  [panic](kernel_module/panic.c)
        1.  [fops](kernel_module/fops.c)
        1.  Asynchronous
            1. [workqueue](kernel_module/workqueue.c)
            1. [sleep](kernel_module/sleep.c)
            1. [kthread](kernel_module/kthread.c)
            1. [timer](kernel_module/timer.c)
            1. [work_from_work](kernel_module/work_from_work.c)
