run-usage.adoc, before:

= run usage

....
./run [OPTIONS] [-- EXTRA_RUN_ARGS]
....

[options="header"]
|===
|Name |Argument name |Description
|`-a` |`ARCH`        |Run architecture `ARCH`.
|`-c` |`NCPUS`       |Emulate `NCPUS` guest CPUs.
|`-D` |              |Run GDB on the emulator itself.
|`-d` |              |Wait for GDB to connect before starting execution.
|`-E` |`CMDSTR`      |Replace the normal init with a minimal init that just evals
                      with given `CMDSTR` bash command string. Example:
                      `-E 'insmod /hello.ko;'`
|`-e` |`CLI_OPTIONS` |Pass an extra Linux kernel command line options,
                      and place them before the dash separator `-`.
                      Only options that come before the `-`, i.e. "standard"
                      options, should be passed with this option.
                      Example: `./run -a arm -e 'init=/poweroff.out'`
|`-F` |`CMDSTR`      |Much like `-f`, but base64 encods the string.
                      Mnemonic: `-F` is to `-f` what `-E` is to `-e`.
|`-f` |`CLI_OPTIONS` |Pass an extra Linux kernel command line options,
                      add a dash `-` separator, and place the options after the dash.
                      Intended for custom options understood by our `init` scripts,
                      most of which are prefixed by `lkmc_`, e.g.:
                      `./run -f 'lkmc_eval="wget google.com" lkmc_lala=y'`
                      Mnenomic: comes after `-e`.
|`-G` |              |Pass extra options to the gem5 executable.
                      Do not confuse with the arguments passed to config scripts,
                      like `fs.py`. Example: `./run -G '--debug-flags=Exec --debug' -g`
|`-g` |              |Use gem5 instead of QEMU.
|`-h` |              |Show this help message.
|`-I` |              |Run with initramfs.
|`-i` |              |Run with initrd.
|`-K` |              |Use KVM. Only works if guest arch == host arch.
|`-k` |              |Enable KGDB.
|`-m` |              |Set the memory size of the guest. E.g.: `-m 512M`. Default: `256M`.
                      The default is the minimum amount that boots all archs without extra
                      options added. Anything lower will lead some arch to fail to boot.
                      Any
|`-T` |              |Enable extra QEMU trace events.
                      `./configure --enable-trace-backends=simple` seems to enable
                      some by default, e.g. `pr_manager_run`, and I don't know how to
                      get rid of them. But those events are rare and should not impact
                      performance, so we just ignore them for now.
|`-U` |              |Pass extra parameters to the program running on the `-u` tmux split.
|`-u` |              |Create a tmUx split the window.
                      You must already be inside of a `tmux` session to use this option.
                      * on the main window, run the emulator as usual
                      * on the split:
                      ** if on QEMU and `-d` is given, GDB
                      ** if on gem5, the gem5 terminal
|`-V` |              |Run QEMU with VNC instead of the default SDL.
                      Connect to it with: `vinagre localhost:5900`.
|`-x` |              |Run in graphic mode. Mnemonic: X11.
|===

Commit message:

trace2line: gem5 support
As noted however, it is potentially too slow to be useful.

run: unify gem5 and qemu tracing under -T

readme: overhaul tracing documentation from what I've learnt from trace2line

run-usage.adoc, after:

= run usage

....
./run [OPTIONS] [-- EXTRA_RUN_ARGS]
....

[options="header"]
|===
|Name |Argument name |Description
|`-a` |`ARCH`        |Run architecture `ARCH`.
|`-c` |`NCPUS`       |Emulate `NCPUS` guest CPUs.
|`-D` |              |Run GDB on the emulator itself.
|`-d` |              |Wait for GDB to connect before starting execution.
|`-E` |`CMDSTR`      |Replace the normal init with a minimal init that just evals
                      with given `CMDSTR` bash command string. Example:
                      `-E 'insmod /hello.ko;'`
|`-e` |`CLI_OPTIONS` |Pass an extra Linux kernel command line options,
                      and place them before the dash separator `-`.
                      Only options that come before the `-`, i.e. "standard"
                      options, should be passed with this option.
                      Example: `./run -a arm -e 'init=/poweroff.out'`
|`-F` |`CMDSTR`      |Much like `-f`, but base64 encods the string.
                      Mnemonic: `-F` is to `-f` what `-E` is to `-e`.
|`-f` |`CLI_OPTIONS` |Pass an extra Linux kernel command line options,
                      add a dash `-` separator, and place the options after the dash.
                      Intended for custom options understood by our `init` scripts,
                      most of which are prefixed by `lkmc_`, e.g.:
                      `./run -f 'lkmc_eval="wget google.com" lkmc_lala=y'`
                      Mnenomic: comes after `-e`.
|`-G` |              |Pass extra options to the gem5 executable.
                      Do not confuse with the arguments passed to config scripts,
                      like `fs.py`. Example: `./run -G '--debug-flags=Exec --debug' -g`
|`-g` |              |Use gem5 instead of QEMU.
|`-h` |              |Show this help message.
|`-I` |              |Run with initramfs.
|`-i` |              |Run with initrd.
|`-K` |              |Use KVM. Only works if guest arch == host arch.
|`-k` |              |Enable KGDB.
|`-m` |              |Set the memory size of the guest. E.g.: `-m 512M`. Default: `256M`.
                      The default is the minimum amount that boots all archs without extra
                      options added. Anything lower will lead some arch to fail to boot.
                      Any
|`-T` |`TRACE_TYPES` |Set trace events to be enabled.
                      If not given, gem5 tracing is completely disabled, while QEMU tracing
                      is enabled but uses default traces that are very rare and don't affect
                      performance. `./configure --enable-trace-backends=simple` seems to enable
                      some traces by default, e.g. `pr_manager_run`, and I don't know how to
                      get rid of them.
|`-U` |              |Pass extra parameters to the program running on the `-u` tmux split.
|`-u` |              |Create a tmUx split the window.
                      You must already be inside of a `tmux` session to use this option.
                      * on the main window, run the emulator as usual
                      * on the split:
                      ** if on QEMU and `-d` is given, GDB
                      ** if on gem5, the gem5 terminal
|`-V` |              |Run QEMU with VNC instead of the default SDL.
                      Connect to it with: `vinagre localhost:5900`.
|`-x` |              |Run in graphic mode. Mnemonic: X11.
|===
